[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Hi. In this video, I'm going to cover the basics of how to log in to the R server,

and I'll talk through the main software that you will be using for your research methods and stats modules, that is RStudio.

And we'll also talk about how to get things set up in our studio.

So by the end of it you will know how to log into the R server.

You'll know your way around RStudio so you know how to create a project a file in RStudio,

you'll understand the idea of a working directory and where your files live.

Um, and you understand what happens in the four quadrants of RStudio.

At the end, we'll also have a look at some settings that we'd like you to adjust to make our studio work a little bit more smoothly for you.

So this is foundational knowledge that will take you through your R journey.

Okay. We're going to we'll start at the very beginning. And I'm going to assume that you've never opened our studio.

So um, you are looking at the Moodle page and here you can see a link to the ah server.

Um, now you need to be on campus to be able to just, uh, use that link.

If you're not on campus, you need to make sure that you're on the VPN or a virtual personal network.

So, um, if you don't know what that is or you haven't set that up, click this link and it will take you to some instructions on how to set up the VPN.

But for now, let's assume you are on campus. So we're just going to click this link and we'll get to the R server.

So this is the sign in window. And it uses the same credentials that you use for anything else to do with Lancaster University.

So we'll say sign in and um okay.

It has not asked me for any username and password because I have logged into something else to do with the university today already.

If you haven't, it will ask you for your username and password.

Okay, so this is what the basic setup of our studio looks like.

We have these four, um, windows or quadrants.

So at the top left here we have it has opened a script for me.

This is what is called the um, so this top left window here is what is called the source quadrant.

Uh, in the bottom left we have the console, then uh, in the top right we have the environment.

And at the bottom here you have something that has multiple panes, but it usually starts, um, with the files pane.

That's why it will go to. So the first thing to know about these four quadrants is that you can adjust their size.

So if depending on what you're doing. So if somehow you didn't want to see the the console, you could make that much smaller.

Um, or if you don't want to see the environment, you can adjust that by using these little accordion,

um, thingies in the top right corner of each quadrant.

Um, you could also kind of change this default setup and say, let's if you want it at your console at the top right.

Instead, you could change those things. But for now, we recommend that you, uh, stick with this default.

Um, okay. So, um, now we're going to start with, um, talking about a project.

So here in the top right corner you can see, um, this blue, um, cube thing and it says Project None.

So that means that we're not going that we're not currently working in a project.

So if we click this downward button, we can say new project.

Um, now, why would we want to work within a project.

It is really helpful because projects help you to group all the relevant parts.

Uh, for instance, everything that's relevant to this module in the same place.

So projects make it easier for R to help you find stuff.

Um, and yeah, that's why we recommend you use that way to organise your things.

So we'll say let's put this in a new directory. Um, uh, so we'll say a new project in a new directory.

Um, and we'll call the directory. We'll give it the name of, um, the module that you're doing.

And you could do that for, for each, um, module.

Right. Um, so here it tells you where it's going to put that that is usually fine.

That will be your home directory on the R server.

So there we go. I've called it psych 4141 I'll say create project.

So Let's see.

Um, here we are. So in the file Spain, you can now see that we have a file called cipher.

14141. approach. Our approach is the file extension for our projects.

And that sits within this folder. Psych 4141. You can see that here, right?

You can see home directory. Ah. And then psych 4141.

And here this is this is where you are. Okay.

Um, because we've created a project, it has, uh, kind of closed the, um, script pane.

So let's create, um, make a new one.

So we'll just say file, new file. And the kind of the types of scripts that we will be using, um.

Uh, our quarto documents. So I'm just opening a new one here, and I'll call it my first script.

Um, and all of this is is fine as it is.

You don't need to worry about that right now. We'll just, um, say create and we'll go into more detail at a later stage.

Okay. So there we have our source quadrant back.

So now let's look, um, in a bit more detail at each quadrant.

So we have the source quadrant here. Um, and that will contain the script that you are working in.

So a script is basically a file that contains all the lines of code that you have created to read in data, to visualise data, to analyse data.

And um, you might want to save that code because you might want to use it again later.

Now there is a couple of useful buttons. Um, one that is important to know about is here the run button.

So if you just click that one, it will run one line of code.

Um, but you also can say run a current chunk of code or the next chunk, um,

etc. or you could run the whole script if you've finished it and you make sure and you're sure that it will,

um, you know, it does everything that you want it to do.

So that is helpful to know, um, we'll talk more about what what what the code chunks are, etc., as well.

Uh, at a later stage, um, and another button that is useful to know about is this kind of pancake thing here that's called outline.

So at the moment there is, uh, almost nothing in our little script here.

Um, but once you have more code and you've defined it that into sections, it will have these section headers here.

So this bit makes it easier to navigate your script.

Okay. So, um, that's the source quadrant.

So we could just save this. Um, this script lets, um, you know, my first script.

Well, this is fine. It should go into that project, so we'll say.

And now you can see, uh, there it is. So we've just used that save button over there.

Okay. Um, bottom left we have the console quadrant.

So that is where the output from the script goes.

So you can think of the console as telling you what is, um, being run and showing you what the output is.

Now, you can also use the console to do things such as pretty simple maths or, uh, you can create variables in, uh, the environment via the console.

So I could put my cursor there and I could say x equals four.

Um, so I have now you can see in your environment you now have a value stored in a place called X, and the value of that thing is four.

And I could say y is three. And there you have it.

It's in our environment. And then I could say x plus y.

And it tells me that if it adds those two numbers up, the outcome is seven.

Um, the console can do lots of other things too.

But the main thing to remember at this point is that the console is helpful to do things, um, that you only want to do once.

If you want to do it more often, you want to stick it. That code in your in your script.

Um, okay. The console does have a little broom symbol here in the top, top corner.

And if you click that, um, it will clean the console for you.

So let's do that. And so if you basically want to have a clean slate and start over or something, you can click that and it gives you a clean window.

Okay. Um. Here in the kind of in this part of the console, it tells you what are things you're working directory is.

So the working directory is the folder that it thinks your files are in.

So. Or it assumes your files are in. So at the moment that's it is are 64141.

So um that is where it will be looking for any files if you ask.

Ah, at some point to read in some data from, from a file. This is the player, this is the folder.

It will, um, look in for that file. Okay.

Um, I think that's everything we need to talk about in terms of the console for now.

Then let's go to the environment quadrant.

So this is where your data will appear when you've read them in um you can create new data frames or new variables.

And all of the all of these objects, as they're called, um, will appear in the environment.

So this is where you will see, uh, objects like DataFrames, variables, values, um, that you've read in or created during the session.

Now, the um, environment also has a broom symbol here.

Um, and if, uh, kind of similarly to the way this works in a console in the environment,

if you want to start with a clean slate, click the broom symbol and it will remove all the objects from the environment.

And that is sometimes helpful because you might have created, done a lot of work,

created lots of new variables, and something is not working, um, in your code.

And that has more often than not something to do with, um, stuff being in the environment that shouldn't be there.

So we can click that. Um, and we say, yes, we are sure that we want to delete all of that.

And there you go. Clean slate. Now, another type that is helpful in this quadrant is the history tab and the history tab.

It basically shows you what lines of code you ran earlier in the session.

Um, and you can see what, what, what we put in the console here.

So x is for y is three x plus y. So you might have written a line of code.

You're happy with that line of code. Um you don't then have to retype it all into your, um, script.

You can just say, um, that line, I want that to go into my, uh, into my into my script.

So that is, that is an option. You can also send it back to the console so that that is helpful to know too.

I wouldn't worry at the moment about these other two tabs.

Um, in the bottom right we have multiple tabs.

Um, so it usually goes automatically to the files tab.

And here you can see your files. So we are in uh, the psych for one for one folder.

Um, and you can see then we have a project there and we have a quarter document or script there.

Um, at the top of this pane, it is, it gives me, it tells me what the file path is.

Um, and then in the same quadrant, there are a few other panes that are useful or tabs.

So when you've created plots, they will appear here. So figures.

Um, what else. There is um a term for packages.

So this lists all the different um packages basically collections of code that are on the server.

And um, if they have a little tick here then it has also been been loaded.

So we'll talk about what that means. Um, later. But you can.

You can see them here easily as well. Um, then we have a help tab.

Um, and these are links to kind of some online resources that that may, may helpful.

Uh, when you're trying to work out, uh, how something works in, in our studio.

Um, okay. So that's that. Finally, let's adjust some settings to make your life with our studio a little easier.

So some people, um, like our studio to remember stuff from session to session.

So, um, we think that is a little dangerous because it often messes up code.

So to a few, to kind of avoid any future hassle, we recommend that you change two settings.

So if we go to I think it's called profile. This might be a little different on the server.

I am here global options. Sorry. So this is under tools and under Global options.

Um and we um so we have lots of different things here.

This is all fine. Um. If this is ticked we want you to untick that.

And here save workspace to our data on exit.

We want it to say never. So these are the two important settings that we need you to change.

And this is what it should look like. So this should be unchecked and this should say never.

Then you say apply. And that will kind of apply to all your future.

Our studio sessions kind of click okay. And there we go.

So that's all for now.

